# How to use theory?
Theory is a set of principles that offer an explanation for events and activities. Creating theories improves our understanding of the world and enables us to create models from which we can make predictions. This article will briefly present how theories relate to your research and how you can use them. 

## Explain your findings with a theory
Use an existing theory to interpret your findings will add depth and scholarship to your research. A theory shows that you understand where your research fits in with what has been done before and provides a possible explanation for what you have found. We used the Information Foraging Theory (IFT) to interpret the findings of a survey on the search behaviour of data scientists. The IFT offers an explanation for how people search for information online and the survey was investigating how data scientists discovered information. When presenting the findings there are competing theories that can be used to offer an explanation. Try to use the theory that most accurately represents your findings or provides the simplest explanation by following the [principle of parsimony](https://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803100346221).

## Towards creating your own theories

When a suitable theory is unavailable select the nearest option and propose extensions that cover your context. In this situation ensure that you use terminology that indicates you are suggesting, proposing or providing a potential theory. Your future work can then further evaluate this theory in another study although providing an initial evaluation to provide evidence that your theory is a reasonable approximation is a good idea. New theories can be presented when analysing a phenomena that has yet to be studied. One example of this is the paper [Pandemic Programming](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10664-020-09875-y). During the 2019/2021 pandemic, the impact of software engineers working from home on mass had not been studied. The authors prepared a survey, created translations in multiple languages and conducted a worldwide survey of developers. From their survey they then proposed a theory that explains the impact of software developers working from home. Ensure that when you are creating your own theory that you cover the literature to find similar theories and justify why these are insufficient for your findings. 

**[Provide figure here]**

## Guide your practice with a set of principles 

The social-technical nature of software engineering provide two types of theories sociology and technical. The technical theories are the easiest to discover, test and form. We can borrow ideas from computer science for these theories. However, the sociology based theories are far harder to test/explain as these require human processes. Borrow ideas from the social sciences when evaluating software engineering theories such as the use of Structural Equation Modelling in the [Pandemic Programming](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10664-020-09875-y) paper. Principles that explain the practice of software engineering are few and far between. Our field is dominated by exceptions and opinions. Work towards providing evidence for a particular course of action and provide sufficient context in your research to help practitioners. See [Generalisability is overrated](https://www.computer.org/csdl/magazine/so/2017/05/mso2017050072/13rRUyft7Bj).

## Use theory in the background and discussion

When using a theory in your own research papers start by introducing the theory in the introduction. The background section of the paper provides the core of the theory, present sufficient details as to provide the reader with an overview without them needing to read another paper. Come back to the theory in the discussion where you start to reason about what your findings mean. The theory provides you with the vocabulary for explaining your findings. Remember to reason about the aspects of the theory that are not used to explain your findings and where the theory lacks constructs. Limitations of a well known existing theory provides areas for future work and are likely to be interesting to readers. 