# Introduction

Welcome to **The Software Engineering PhD Guide!**

```{image} ./figures/questions.png
```

Society faces tough challenges from climate change, economic pressure, healthcare and mental well being. In all fields software engineering and AI play a fundamental role to leverage the copious amounts of data being generated by human-machine systems to tackle these challenges. To do this we need technical experts to effectively and ethically use technology to devise solutions. We need SE4AI practitioners.


## What is The Software Engineering PhD Guide?

A PhD is one way to develop the skills required for tackling tomorrow's challenges. **The Software Engineering PhD Guide** has been written to assist and encourage PhD students in software engineering. I've put together suggestions to help students when they get stuck and to prepare students for tackling society's problems. 

## How to use this guide?

There are several ways to use this guide. 

1. If you are a potential student, read through this guide to find out more about a PhD.
2. If you are a PhD student, when you get stuck and don't know how to move forward read the relevant section. 
3. If you are my PhD student, skim the guide as I'll refer to specific sections as we go. 

## What is a PhD?

A PhD is a training program in research. You will learn to become an independent researcher and produce knowledge that contributes to your field. In software engineering a PhD is also an opportunity to develop deep technical skills in a short period of time in a specific area. 

## Why pursue a PhD?

My answer to this question is to build skills to help tackle society's problems with technology and the scientific method i.e. experimentation. My PhD philosophy involves training students in 1) data exploration and analysis, 2) software engineering and development, and 3) understanding end-user needs. Along the way you will build skills in effective communication, how to conduct research, and in critical thinking. 

I also believe research is a collaborative activity and would encourage all PhD students to collaborate with other students.    

## Suggestions and feedback

Hi, I'm Scott Barnett the author of this guide. Please feel free to create Github issues for chapter suggestions, corrections or feedback. 
